Rediet Abebe (Amharic: ረድኤት አበበ; born 1991) is an Ethiopian computer scientist working in algorithms and artificial intelligence. She is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at the University of California, Berkeley. Previously, she was a Junior Fellow at the Harvard Society of Fellows.
Abebe's research develops mathematical and computational frameworks for examining questions related to inequality.She co-founded the multi-institutional interdisciplinary research initiatives Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) and Black in AI.
Abebe was born and raised in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.She was educated in the Ethiopian National Curriculum at Nazareth School before winning a competitive merit-based scholarship to attend the International Community School of Addis Ababa for high school.
Abebe attended Harvard University where she earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in mathematics and later a Master of Science degree in applied mathematics. As an undergraduate, she co-authored research papers in mathematics, physics, and public health. She completed her master's degree from Harvard SEAS, conducting research with professor David C. Parkes. While at Harvard, Abebe contributed to The Harvard Crimson as a staff writer, where she focused on the Cambridge public school system (2009-2011).
After college, she attended the University of Cambridge as the Governor William Shirley Scholar at Pembroke College. She completed the Mathematics Tripos and earned a Master of Advanced Studies in pure mathematics under the supervision of Imre Leader.
Abebe completed her doctoral degree in computer science at Cornell University, where she was advised by Jon Kleinberg. Her dissertation made notable contributions across multiple fields in computer science, receiving the 2020 ACM SIGKDD Dissertation Award and an honorable mention for the ACM SIGecom Dissertation Award. She is the first Black woman to complete a Ph.D. in computer science in the university's history.
Abebe's research develops techniques in AI and algorithms to improve access to opportunity for historically marginalized communities. Her work has introduced new algorithmic frameworks for examining questions related to discrimination and inequality.
Throughout 2019 Abebe served on the National Institutes of Health Working Group on AI along AI experts including Kate Crawford, Dina Katabi, Daphne Koller, and Eric Lander. The working group was tasked with developing a comprehensive report and recommendations, which were unanimously approved by the Advisory Committee to the Director and NIH General Director Francis Collins.
In 2019, Abebe was inducted into the Harvard Society of Fellows. She is the second Junior Fellow with a CS Ph.D., the first female computer scientist, and the first Black computer scientist in the Society's history.
Abebe joined the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley as an Assistant Professor, where she is a member of both the theory and artificial intelligence research groups. She is the first Black female professor in the history of the department and the second in the history of the College of Engineering.
Abebe co-founded the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) initiative, a multi-disciplinary research collective that uses algorithms and mechanism design to tackle inequality, with Kira Goldner, in 2016. Abebe has since been co-organizing the initiative with Irene Lo and Ana-Andreea Stoica. MD4SG hosts an annual workshop series highlighting work and connecting the community of researchers committed to using algorithms to improve societal welfare.
Abebe was honored as a pioneer in the 2019 MIT Technology Review's Innovators Under 35 in part for her work co-founding MD4SG.Her dissertation received the 2020 ACM SIGKDD Dissertation Award and an honorable mention for the ACM SIGecom Dissertation Award for offering foundations of the emerging area of Mechanism Design for Social Good.
Abebe co-founded Black in AI, a network of 1,500 researchers working on AI, with Timnit Gebru, in 2016. The organization arranges annual workshops at the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) and offers networking and collaborative opportunities. Through Black in AI, Abebe has spearheaded the Academic Program, for which she was honored in the 2019 Bloomberg 50 list as a one to watch.
Abebe's awards and honors include:
2020: ACM SIGKDD Dissertation Award
2020: ACM SIGecom Dissertation Award (honorable mention)
2020: Innovation for Equity, Rising Star Award
2019: Harvard Society of Fellows, Junior Fellow
2019: MIT Technology Review, 35 Under 35
2019: Bloomberg 50, One to Watch
